Data modeling for DynamoDB tables - Amazon DynamoDB

Documentation
Amazon DynamoDB
Developer Guide

Data modeling for DynamoDB tables

Before we dive into data modeling, it's important to understand some DynamoDB fundamentals.
DynamoDB is a key-value NoSQL database which allows flexible schema. The set of data attributes
apart from the key attributes for each item can be either uniform or discrete. The DynamoDB key
schema is in the form of either a simple primary key where a partition key uniquely identifies
an item, or in the form of a composite primary key where a combination of a partition key and
sort key uniquely defines an item. The partition key is hashed to determine the physical
location of data and retrieve it. Therefore, it is important to choose a high cardinality and
horizontally scalable attribute as a partition key to ensure even distribution of data. The sort
key attribute is optional in the key schema and having a sort key enables modelling one-to-many
relationships and creating item collections in DynamoDB. Sort keys are also referred to as range
keys—they are used to sort items in an item collection and also allow flexible
range-based operations.

For more details and best practices on DynamoDB key schema, you can refer to the
following:

Partitions and data distribution in DynamoDB

Best practices for designing and using partition keys
effectively in DynamoDB

Best practices for using sort keys to organize data in DynamoDB

Choosing the right DynamoDB partition key

Secondary indexes are often needed to support additional query patterns in DynamoDB. Secondary
indexes are shadow tables where the same data is organised via a different key schema compared
to the base table. A local secondary index (LSI) shares the same partition key as the base table
and allows having an alternate sort key allowing it to share the base table's capacity. A global
secondary index (GSI) can have a different partition key as well as a different sort key
attribute than the base table which means throughput management for a GSI is independent of the
base table.

For more details on secondary indexes and best practices, you can refer to the
following:

Improving data access with secondary indexes in
DynamoDB

Best practices for using secondary indexes in DynamoDB

Let's now look at data modeling a little closer. The process of designing a flexible and
highly-optimized schema on DynamoDB, or any NoSQL database for that matter, can be a challenging
skill to learn. The goal of this module is to help you develop a mental flowchart for designing
a schema that will take you from use case into production. We will start with an introduction to
the foundational choice of any design, single table versus multiple table design. Then we will
review the multitude of design patterns (building blocks) that can be used to achieve various
organizational or performance results for your application. Finally, we are including a variety
of complete schema design packages for different use cases and industries.

Topics

Item collections - how to model one-to-many
relationships in DynamoDB

Data Modeling foundations in DynamoDB

Data modeling building blocks in DynamoDB

Data modeling schema design packages in DynamoDB

Best practices for modeling relational data in
DynamoDB

To use the Amazon Web Services Documentation, Javascript must be enabled. Please refer to your browser's Help pages for instructions.

Document Conventions

DAX cluster sizing guide

Working with Item Collections

If you've got a moment, please tell us what we did right so we can do more of it.

If you've got a moment, please tell us how we can make the documentation better.