The Web Playback SDK is a client-side only JavaScript library designed to
create a local
Spotify Connect
 device in
your browser, stream and control audio tracks from Spotify inside your website and get metadata about the current playback.

Info:The Web Playback SDK requires a
Spotify Premium subscription
 (mobile only types of premium subscriptions are excluded)

Getting started

The Web Playback SDK is supported by most web browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari
and Microsoft Edge) in both mobile (Android and iOS) and Desktop (macOS,
Windows and Linux).

We provide a
getting started tutorial
 to help
you get started with the Web Playback SDK.

Documentation

The documentation is organized as follows:

Concepts that clarify key topics

How-Tos, step-by-step guides that cover practical tasks or use cases

Reference, the API specification

Examples

We've provided a complete
step-by-step how-to
 to lead you
through the creation of a simple web app that makes a Spotify Player instance
that can be controlled through Spotify Connect.

Troubleshooting

iOS support has some limitations:

The playback does not start automatically after transfering playback. The user
must interact with the SDK events to play audio.

The Web Playback SDK require iframes to allow encrypted-media and autoplay in
cases of cross origin iframes. This currently affects Chrome browsers since
they introduced Feature Policy which disallows features within iframes by
default.

Some users have reported issues when loading the SDK using certain browser
extensions, specifically the ones related to privacy or 3rd party blockers. If
you experience a similar behavior, try to temporarily disable those extensions.

Support

If you have any questions or run into any issues while using the Spotify Web
Playback SDK, you can find help in the
Spotify Developer
Community
.
Here, you can connect and get help from other developers.

Legal

This SDK must not be used in commercial projects without Spotify's prior
written approval. By using Spotify developer tools, you accept our
Developer
Terms of Use
. They contain important information about what you can
and can't do with our developer tools. We highly suggest getting familiar with
our
Developer Policy
 and
Complying with Spotify's developer
policy
. Please read them carefully.