This SDK lets you offload complexity to the main Spotify application
such as: playback, authentication, networking, and offline caching. This means that
you can focus on making your own user experience delightful.

Getting started

We have a friendly
Getting Started
 guide
which walks you through configuring your Xcode project, as well as
authenticating users, connecting to the Spotify main application, and
subscribing to player state changes.

To use the Spotify iOS SDK, your application will need to get the user's
permission to control playback remotely first. We provide built-in support for
this (as seen in the
User Authentication section of the Getting Started
), and

additional scopes can be requested

for making calls to the Spotify Web API.

In the
iOS SDK GitHub
, you will
find a
Demo Projects
 folder containing numerous demo applications with full
source provided to help you build your first application with the iOS SDK.

Key features

Lightweight SDK

Authentication

Always-in-sync Playback (via the Spotify main application)

Offline support *

Built-in networking, track relinking, and caching support

*Excludes calls to the Web API. User must initially authenticate your
application, which requires an internet connection.

Download

The latest stable version of the iOS SDK can be downloaded from
GitHub
.

Requirements

The framework requires a deployment target of iOS 12 or higher. The following architectures are supported in the SDK:

device: arm64

simulator: arm64 x86_64

A physical iOS device is needed to install the Spotify app.
Learn more about building to devices
.

Documentation

The documentation is organized as follows:

Concepts that clarify key topics

Tutorials, which serve as an introduction to important topics when using iOS SDK

Reference, the API specification

API documentation

The download packages include comprehensive documentation of all API classes
in the
/docs
 folder. You can also read the documentation

online
.

Support

Please report problems with this SDK through the
public issue tracker
 on GitHub.

Legal

Note that by using Spotify iOS SDK, you accept our
Developer Terms of
Service
.