Spotify Open Access (SOA) allows partners with existing subscription or
membership systems to publish podcast content on Spotify, and restrict access
to that content based on existing subscription enforcement.

Info:Spotify Open Access features are available only for approved partners

Spotify Open Access (SOA) is a first-of-its-kind offering in the audio
industry, broadening distribution for creators who offer paid content. The
system enables creators with existing paid content businesses to activate their
customers on Spotify, and it allows Spotify users to unlock and listen to
content they paid for via third-party services: for example, publications with
paywalled content or licensed audiobook providers.

How it works

Info:The Open Access API specs are subject to change at Spotify's discretion.

You control who has access

Use the Open Access API to tell Spotify what episodes or shows are playable by
whom using the concept of
Entitlements
.
Subscription canceled or credit card expired? You can revoke or update
entitlements in near realtime.

Tell your subscribers to connect with Spotify

Your subscribers can link their accounts to a Spotify account using

OAuth
. Spotify does not store any passwords or
usernames of your subscribers and they can revoke access at any time.

Securing your content

Content hosted on the Spotify platform is protected by Spotify's battle-tested
content protection/DRM systems. Restrictions are enforced by services in the
Spotify backend, ensuring that only authorized users are allowed to stream a
particular media item. Restrictions take into account the content's
availability markets and dates, as well as the users access permissions to SOA
content.

Example

Lunar Industries
 is a fictitious
company we've created to help illustrate various scenarios, and examples, and
to provide sample data from the SOA API.

Lunar Industries has multiple shows on Spotify. Users can subscribe to either a
"Bonus" tier or a "Premium" tier on Lunar Industries' website. Of all of their
shows on Spotify, one is public (no authorization required), one has bonus
episodes that only certain subscribers can access, and one is a paid show apart
from a teaser trailer. Each gated show has been set up with corresponding

entitlements
. Lunar
Industries has published the following shows:

Public
 -
Moonshots
 does not require a paid subscription.

Limited Access
 -
The Dark Side
 is a show that has a few bonus episodes available to subscribers in the "Bonus Content" tier or higher.

Premium Access
 -
Living on the Moon
 is for "Premium Tier" subscribers only.

The source code can be found on
GitHub

Legal

Integrating with Spotify Open Access is subject to applicable terms and conditions.