How the Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam process works | Web Security Academy - PortSwigger

Get Burp Suite Certified for

How to get your certification

Get certified

Get prepared

Ready to take the exam?

Here's what you need to know.

The Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam is a challenging practical examination designed to demonstrate your web security testing knowledge and Burp Suite skills. To pass the certification exam, you are required to
demonstrate an in-depth knowledge of a wide range of vulnerability classes, and the Burp Suite functionality required to support you in discovery, understanding, and exploitation.

Overview

The exam follows a process that is similar to the labs in the Web Security Academy, and the practice exam. However, in order to take the exam you first need to go through our automated identity verification process.

To become a Burp Suite Certified Practitioner, you need to work through the following steps:

Purchase your certification exam.

Check the system requirements.

Configure your device to work with our proctoring software, and upload your ID documents.

Take your certification exam.

Get your certification results.

You'll need a Burp Suite Professional subscription to take the exam.

To undertake the certification exam, you will need access to an active subscription of Burp Suite Professional.
Get a subscription to Burp
Suite Professional now
, if you don't already have access to a separate license.

Purchasing your exam

You can purchase a Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam from your PortSwigger user account. Once you have purchased your exam, you will need to configure your device to work with our proctoring service. This service also verifies your identity before your exam starts.

How does an automated proctoring service work?

The process is simple, and involves an ID check by our automated proctor. You will be unable to pass the exam until we have verified your ID.

Purchase your Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam now

"Overall my
experience was totally crazy fun, I don't think I've ever taken an exam like this since the OSCP. It was always a wild ride and one of the most enjoyable."

Johnny Villarreal

Using our proctoring service

In order to complete your exam, you need to configure your device to work with our proctoring service. You also need to upload an image of a government-issued photo ID. This can be a driver's license, passport, military identification card, or another form of acceptable ID.

Make sure that your name and photo are visible and that the image is clear and bright enough to be easily read.

Preparing for the exam

Before you take your real exam, we strongly advise that you work through our four preparation steps. They have been designed to thoroughly prepare you, by testing the wide variety of both vulnerabilities and skills that you
will be required to demonstrate to successfully pass the exam.

The preparation steps should also help you to gauge the difficulty level of the exam, and therefore judge for yourself whether you are at the required skill level to gain the certification.

There are no restrictions on the amount of times you may complete the preparation steps.

Go to exam preparation steps

What the exam involves

In order to take the exam, you will first need to log in to your PortSwigger user account. You will find a button labeled "Take exam". By clicking this button, you will begin the official exam process. Once you have successfully completed the automated proctoring session, your exam will begin.

You will have four hours to complete the Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam. There are two applications, and each application contains deliberate vulnerabilities. This means that each application
can be completed in three stages:

Stage 1
: Access any user account.

Stage 2
: Use your user account to access the admin interface, perhaps by elevating your privileges or compromising the administrator account.

Stage 3
: Use the admin interface to read the contents of /home/carlos/secret from the server's filesystem, and submit it using "submit solution".

While exploiting each application, you will gain access to powerful functionality. If you use this to delete your own account or a core system component, you may make your exam impossible to complete.

There is always an administrator account with the username "
administrator
", plus a lower-privileged account usually called "
carlos
". If you find a
username enumeration vulnerability, you may be able to break into a low-privileged account using the following
username list
 and
password list
.

Each application has up to one active user, who will be logged in either as a user or an administrator. You can assume that they will visit the homepage of the site every 15 seconds, and click any
links in any emails they receive from the application. You can use exploit server's "send to victim" functionality to target them with reflected vulnerabilities.

If you find an SSRF vulnerability, you can use it to read files by accessing an internal-only service, running on localhost on port 6566.

Host header attacks are fair game, but the _lab and _lab_analytics cookies are part of the core exam functionality - please don't waste your time tampering with them.

To understand the skills required to take this exam, please refer to the
prepare for the exam
 page.

Exam conditions

The integrity of the Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam is what makes it so valuable, so we have a robust system for identifying and banning people who attempt to cheat. Here's what you need to know:

Any cheating will result in a permanent ban.

You must use a Burp project file for the full period of the exam, and submit that project file for analysis.

You must complete the exam without help from anyone.

You must not share your exam addresses with anyone.

Requirements

The following sections outline the requirements for the exam. Please make sure you read these sections thoroughly before purchasing your certification exam.

Proficiency/skill

To pass the certification exam, you are required to demonstrate an in-depth knowledge of a wide range of vulnerability classes, and the Burp Suite functionality required to support you in discovery, understanding, and exploitation.

To get ready for the challenges you'll face in the certification exam, please refer to the
how to prepare for the exam
 page.

Language

All exam materials will be presented in English. If you can comfortably read the learning materials within the Web Security Academy, and all of the exam guidance pages, the exam will not present
you with any language-based challenges.

System

Operating system:

MacOS X 10.5 or higher.

Windows Vista or higher.

Linux

ChromeOS.

Browser:

The latest version of Google Chrome - please disable your pop-up blocker.

Hardware:

Desktop or laptop.

Built-in or external webcam.

Built-in or external microphone.

Please note that tablets and mobile devices are not supported.

Internet:

An upload and download speed of 2Mbps.

Hot spots are not recommended because a reliable internet connection is essential.

Software:

Burp Suite Professional. Please note that it will not be possible for you to complete the exam without Burp Suite Professional.

In addition, we require that you use a project file, which we may request up to a week after you have taken the exam to confirm your certificate or investigate any reported issues.

Get Burp Suite Professional

Your exam results

We will notify you by email with your results. If you successfully pass the Burp Suite Certified Practitioner exam, you will receive a link to your certificate by email. If you failed the exam, we will
let you know by email. We will also provide you with resources and guidance to help you prepare for re-booking your certification exam.

If you haven't received your results after 3-5 working days, log in to your PortSwigger user account to check the status of your exam.

If you successfully pass the exam, and become a Burp Suite Certified Practitioner, make sure you let the world know! Add your certification status to your social channels and profiles, and let
your employers and prospective employers know.

Verifying your exam results

If your employer (or prospective employer) wishes to validate your certification, you will need to share the unique code on your certificate and the
link to the validation platform
.

[#### How the exam works

Read more](/web-security/certification/how-it-works)
[#### Exam hints and guidance

Read more](/web-security/certification/exam-hints-and-guidance)
[#### What the exam involves

Read more](/web-security/certification/how-it-works#what-the-exam-involves)
[#### Buy your BSCP exam

Buy now](https://portswigger.net/buy/certification)