sponsored post

Sponsored Post: Wynter, Pinecone, Kinsta, Bridgecrew, IP2Location, StackHawk, InterviewCamp.io, Educative, Stream, Fauna, Triplebyte

High Scalability

01 Feb 2022
— 3 min read

Who's Hiring?

Wynter
 is looking for
system administrators, engineers, and developers
 to join its research panel. Participate in research surveys, get paid ($90-$180/hr) for your feedback and comments.  Super low key commitment, 10-15 mins per survey.
Learn more and sign up
.

DevOps Engineer
: At
Kinsta
, we set out to create the best managed hosting platform in the world. If you are an experienced DevOps Engineer who is constantly looking for ways to innovate and improve, we might just be the place for you! As Kinsta's DevOps Engineer, you will be instrumental in making sure that our infrastructure is always on the bleeding edge of technology, remaining stable and high-performing at all times. If you love working with Linux, have a background in PHP, and have worked with cutting-edge technologies, such as Ansible and LXC, check us out and
apply here
.

SysOps Enginee
r: As
Kinsta
's SysOps Engineer, you'll play a key role in caring for the health of our servers, preventing issues, and responding immediately to mitigate any problems in our infrastructure.  If you have experience in hosting and with the WordPress stack, have worked with Ubuntu or Debian-based systems, and cutting-edge technologies, such Ansible and LXC, you should definitely check us out and
apply here
!

JavaScript Developer
:
Kinsta
's Development Team aims to create truly effective solutions for our customers and our internal teams. We believe the only way to maintain and scale our standards is to focus on quality code. If you are a talented JavaScript developer and you would like to work with an ownership-embracing, highly skilled team in a relaxed environment where culture is as important as technical excellence,
apply here
.

InterviewCamp.io
 has hours of system design content. They also do live system design discussions every week. They break down interview prep into fundamental building blocks. Try out their platform.

Triplebyte
 lets exceptional software engineers skip screening steps at hundreds of top tech companies like
Apple, Dropbox, Mixpanel, and Instacart
. Make your job search
O
(1), not
O
(
n
).
Apply here.

Need excellent people? Advertise your job here!

Cool Products and Services

Search like you mean it
.
Pinecone
 is a
vector database
 that makes it easy to add semantic search to your applications. It combines state-of-the-art vector search libraries like
Faiss
, advanced features such as filtering, and fully managed distributed infrastructure for high performance and reliability at any scale. Give your users better search results and recommendations and make them happy.
Get started for free.

Bridgecrew
 is the
cloud security platform for developers
. By leveraging automation and delivering security-as-code, Bridgecrew empowers teams to find, fix, and prevent misconfigurations in deployed cloud resources and in infrastructure as code.
Get started for free!

IP2Location
 is
IP address geolocation service provider
 since 2002. The geolocation database or API detects location, proxy and other >20 parameters. The technology has been cited in more than 700 research papers and trusted by many Fortune 500 companies.
Try it today!

Developers care about shipping secure applications. Application security products and processes, however, have not kept up with advances in software development. There are a new breed of tools hitting the market that enable developers to take the lead on AppSec. Learn how engineering teams are using products like
StackHawk
 and
Snyk
 to
add security bug testing to their CI pipelines
.

Stateful JavaScript Apps. Effortlessly add state to your Javascript apps with
FaunaDB
. Generous free tier.
Try now!

Learn to balance architecture trade-offs and design scalable enterprise-level software. Check out
Educative.io
's 5-part learning path:
Scalability and System Design for Developers
. In addition to other content written by seasoned industry experts, this path includes core material from our bestselling course
Grokking the System Design Interview
. Join more than 500,000 other learners from top tech companies around the world.

Build, scale and personalize your
news feeds and activity streams with getstream.io
. Try the API now in this
5 minute interactive tutorial
.
Stream
 is free up to 3 million feed updates so it's easy to get started. Client libraries are available for Node, Ruby, Python, PHP, Go, Java and .NET. Stream is currently also hiring Devops and Python/Go developers in Amsterdam. More than 400 companies rely on Stream for their production feed infrastructure, this includes apps with 30 million users. With your help we'd like to ad a few zeros to that number.

Fun and Interesting Events

Advertise here!

If you are interested in a sponsored post for an event, job, or product, please
contact
 us for more information.

Make Your Job Search
O
(1) — not
O
(
n
)

Triplebyte
 is unique because they're a team of engineers running their own centralized technical assessment. Companies like
Apple, Dropbox, Mixpanel, and Instacart
 now let Triplebyte-recommended engineers skip their own screening steps.

We found that
High Scalability readers
 are about 80% more likely to be in the top bracket of engineering skill.

Take
Triplebyte's multiple-choice quiz
 (system design and coding questions) to see if they can help you scale your career faster.

If you are interested in a sponsored post for an event, job, or product, please
contact
 us for more information.