About InfoQ

InfoQ Editors

Write for InfoQ

About C4Media

Media Kit

Learn and share the changes and innovations in professional software development.

Level up your expertise. Grow your career.

WRITE FOR INFOQ

InfoQ is written exclusively by software practitioners like yourself. Our goal is to share inspiring content from real-world use cases, best practices used by innovator and early adopter companies, and news on emerging trends.

Join our community, learn and share the future of software development.

Writing for InfoQ you'll uncover emerging software trends and
practices in your domain. You'll build valuable knowledge and
connections with the people you admire. You'll develop writing
skills that can transform how you articulate new ideas whilst
sharing what you've learned with a global community of over 1.5m
senior software developers. Help developers like yourself adopt
the right patterns and practices without the marketing noise.

Are you:

A software engineer, architect, or team lead with senior-level
experience?

Passionate about innovation in software development?

Looking to grow your career and contribute to the software
development community?

A curious explorer of new technologies and keep ahead of the
latest software development trends?

Wanting to start writing or refine your current writing to build
a portfolio of practical advice for your peers?

Looking to grow your connections and belong to a community of
software professionals?

If so, we would like to meet you!

Write weekly news

Write an article

InfoQ is a living community.

Here you will find mentoring, peer sharing, and an inclusive
mindset to fuel your growth.

Learn directly from practitioners pushing the boundaries.

Who would you like to learn from? You'll have direct access to
world-class peers and developer superstars who shape the
future of software development. Ask the questions you want to
find the answers to. Then share them with InfoQ readers to
grow their knowledge. As a contributor to InfoQ, you'll get
complimentary access to our international QCon software
development conferences and online InfoQ Live event series.
Connect with peers and leaders to fuel your growth.

Level up your expertise. Help senior developers like you.

By writing about your passion, you'll develop your thinking,
showcase your developer skills, learn how to articulate new
ideas in writing, emphasize actionable ideas, and grow your
domain expertise. Writing for InfoQ will help you become the
domain expert you want to be while inspiring senior developers
worldwide.

Writing for InfoQ has opened many doors and increased
career opportunities for me. On one hand, I was able to
deeply engage experts and thought leaders to learn more
about the topics I covered. On the other hand, I can
disseminate my learnings to the wider tech community and
understand how the technologies are used in the real
world.

Vivian Hu

Director of Products @Second State; InfoQ DevOps
Contributor

Build your portfolio. Grow your career.

Contribute new knowledge to a global community of senior
software developers while developing your writing skills with
support from a professional team. Establish your expertise
with a portfolio on InfoQ and increase your visibility within
the software community to open new opportunities.

Becoming an editor for InfoQ was one of the best decisions
of my career. It has challenged me and helped me grow in
so many ways. We'd love to have more people

join our team.

Thomas Betts

Lead Editor, Software Architecture and Design @InfoQ;
Laureate Application Architect

InfoQ is a learning community.

Here you will find valuable editorial support. From your first draft to your portfolio.

Are you a software practitioner with writing experience and would like to reach a specialized, global audience?

Or are you new to writing but know the value of this skill for growing your
dev career? Bring
your interest and let's work together to help you write news, long-form articles, and Q&As that
share the changes and innovations in enterprise software development. We will support you to
become an InfoQ editor or author with:

An
effective mentoring structure.
Benefit from a
3-week
async mentorship program for the InfoQ editor role.

Relevant, short tutorials
for clear and structured news items

Actionable and professional feedback
from your first news item draft

Deep
review
of long-format articles. High quality of your published piece

Supportive team
who check-in on your progress and help you feel welcome

Write weekly news

Write an article

You can contribute to InfoQ in two key ways.

Write news on the latest developments in your domain each week.

InfoQ News Editors join a global team of 40+ software engineers, architects, and team leads
who regularly contribute
one news post per week (that's around
400 - 500 words long)
, as
part of an editorial queue (Java, .NET, Web Development, AI, ML & Data Engineering, DevOps,
Mobile & IoT, Cloud, Architecture). We pair
you with
an InfoQ
mentor and a Journalism
professor and support you to learn the InfoQ style, grow an author portfolio and
connect
with peers from your area of expertise. InfoQ News Editors attend our
QCon
software events

with a press ticket and stay ahead of the adoption curve.

Learn more about
the value of becoming an InfoQ News
Editor
. Let us know about your
topics
of interest and expertise by filling out
our form
 or getting in touch at

contribute@infoq.com
.

Write long-form articles that share deep technical knowledge with your peers.

InfoQ long-form articles are timely, educational, and practical pieces (around 1500 - 4000
words in length). Through articles, we aim to share knowledge and innovation in professional
software development and help people with actionable ideas.

If you want to contribute an article to InfoQ, we
pair you with a technical reviewer and guide you from idea to published work.
Read more about
the benefits of contributing an
article to InfoQ
 and get in touch at contribute@infoq.com.

Please view our author guidelines
 and
submit an article proposal
.

Join our community.

GET IN TOUCH