POSTED ON JANUARY 12, 2026 TO
Culture
,
Open Source
,
Web

CSS at Scale With StyleX

By
Pascal Hartig

Build a large enough website with a large enough codebase, and you'll eventually find that CSS presents challenges at scale. It's no different at Meta, which is why we open-sourced StyleX, a solution for CSS at scale. StyleX combines the ergonomics of CSS-in-JS with the performance of static CSS. It allows atomic styling of components while deduplicating definitions to reduce bundle size and exposes a simple API for developers.

StyleX has become the standard at companies like Figma and Snowflake. Here at Meta,
it's the standard styling system
 across Facebook, Instagram, WhatsApp, Messenger, and Threads.

On this episode of the Meta Tech Podcast, meet Melissa, a software engineer at Meta and one of StyleX's maintainers.
Pascal Hartig
 talks to her about all things StyleX—its origins, how open source has been a force multiplier for the project, and what it's like interacting with large companies across the industry as they've adopted StyleX.

Download or listen to the episode below:

You can also find the episode wherever you get your podcasts, including:

Spotify

Apple Podcasts

Pocket Casts

The
Meta Tech Podcast
 is a podcast, brought to you by Meta, where we highlight the work Meta's engineers are doing at every level – from low-level frameworks to end-user features.

Send us feedback on
Instagram
,
Threads
, or
X
.

And if you're interested in learning more about career opportunities at Meta visit the
Meta Careers
 page.

Share this:

Click to share on Facebook (Opens in new window)
Facebook

Click to share on Threads (Opens in new window)
Threads

Click to share on WhatsApp (Opens in new window)
WhatsApp

Click to share on LinkedIn (Opens in new window)
LinkedIn

Click to share on Reddit (Opens in new window)
Reddit

Click to share on X (Opens in new window)
X

Click to share on Bluesky (Opens in new window)
Bluesky

Click to share on Mastodon (Opens in new window)
Mastodon

Click to share on Hacker News (Opens in new window)
Hacker News

Click to email a link to a friend (Opens in new window)
Email

TAGS:
Meta Tech Podcast

Read More in Culture

View All

DEC 17, 2025

How We Built Meta Ray-Ban Display: From Zero to Polish

AUG 4, 2025

Building a human-computer interface for everyone

JUL 1, 2025

An inside look at Meta's transition from C to Rust on mobile

MAY 15, 2025

Open-sourcing Pyrefly: A faster Python type checker written in Rust

JAN 24, 2025

Bringing Jetpack Compose to Instagram for Android

JAN 16, 2025

Measuring productivity impact with Diff Authoring Time