Payments Apps API

The Payments Apps API enables you to programmatically access your payments app's configuration data. You can use the Payments Apps API to resolve, pend, or reject payments sessions. You can also use the Payments Apps API to reject or resolve captures, refunds, and void sessions.

Ask assistant

Choose a version:

unstable 2026-04 release candidate2026-01 latest2025-10 2025-07 2025-04

2026-01latest

Anchor to Authentication
Authentication

All Payments Apps API requests require a valid Shopify access token.

Public and custom apps created in the Dev Dashboard generate tokens using
OAuth
. Include your token as a
X-Shopify-Access-Token
 header on all API requests.

To keep the platform secure, payments apps need to request specific
access scopes
 during the install process. Only request as much data access as your app needs to work.

All requests to the Payments Apps API must be authenticated. Learn more about
getting started with authentication
 and
building payments apps
.

Anchor to GraphQL endpoint
GraphQL endpoint

The Payments Apps API is available at a single GraphQL
POST
 endpoint:

https://{shop_domain}/payments_apps/api/2026-01/graphql.json

You can access the Payments Apps API using curl or any HTTP client.

Anchor to Versioning
Versioning

The Payments Apps API is a
versioned API
. Updates are released quarterly. To keep your app stable, make sure that you specify a supported version in the URL.

Anchor to Usage limitations
Usage limitations

The Payments Apps API is available only to
approved Payments Partners
.

All apps and services connecting to the Payments Apps API are subject to Shopify's
API Terms of Service
.

The Payments Apps API doesn't support sending additional information back to Shopify.

Anchor to Rate limits
Rate limits

The Payments Apps API enforces
rate limits
 on all requests.

Anchor to Status and error codes
Status and error codes

All API queries return HTTP status codes that contain more information about the response.

Anchor to 200 OK
200 OK

GraphQL HTTP status codes are different from REST API status codes. Most importantly, the GraphQL API can return a
200 OK
 response code in cases that would typically produce 4xx or 5xx errors in REST.

Anchor to Error handling
Error handling

The response for the errors object contains additional detail to help you debug your operation.

The response for mutations contains additional detail to help debug your query. To access this, you must request
userErrors
.

Properties

errors•array

A list of all errors returned

Show error item properties

errors[n].message•string

Contains details about the error(s).

errors[n].extensions•object

Provides more information about the error(s) including properties and metadata.

Show extensions properties

extensions.code•string

Shows error codes common to Shopify. Additional error codes may also be shown.

Show common error codes

THROTTLED

The client has exceeded the
rate limit
. Similar to 429 Too Many Requests.

ACCESS_DENIED

The client doesn't have correct
authentication
 credentials. Similar to 401 Unauthorized.

SHOP_INACTIVE

The shop is not active. This can happen when stores repeatedly exceed API rate limits or due to fraud risk.

INTERNAL_SERVER_ERROR

Shopify experienced an internal error while processing the request. This error is returned instead of 500 Internal Server Error in most circumstances.

Anchor to 4xx and 5xx status codes
4xx and 5xx status codes

The 4xx and 5xx errors occur infrequently. They are often related to network communications, your account, or an issue with Shopify's services.

Many errors that would typically return a 4xx or 5xx status code, return an HTTP 200 errors response instead. Refer to the
200 OK section
 above for details.

Anchor to 400 Bad Request
400 Bad Request

The server will not process the request.

Anchor to 402 Payment Required
402 Payment Required

The shop is frozen. The shop owner will need to pay the outstanding balance to
unfreeze
 the shop.

Anchor to 403 Forbidden
403 Forbidden

The shop is forbidden. Returned if the store has been marked as fraudulent.

Anchor to 404 Not Found
404 Not Found

The resource isn't available. This is often caused by querying for something that's been deleted.

Anchor to 423 Locked
423 Locked

The shop isn't available. This can happen when stores repeatedly exceed API rate limits or due to fraud risk.

Anchor to 5xx Errors
5xx Errors

An internal error occurred in Shopify. Check out the
Shopify status page
 for more information.

Info

Didn't find the status code you're looking for? View the complete list of

API status response and error codes
.

Info:

Didn't find the status code you're looking for? View the complete list of

API status response and error codes
.

Was this page helpful?

YesNo