A10 Mishandling of Exceptional Conditions
OWASP/Top10
5.2k
1k
OWASP/Top10
About OWASP
What are Application Security Risks?
Establishing a Modern Application Security Program
Top 10:2025 List
Top 10:2025 List
A01 Broken Access Control
A02 Security Misconfiguration
A03 Software Supply Chain Failures
A04 Cryptographic Failures
A05 Injection
A06 Insecure Design
A07 Authentication Failures
A08 Software or Data Integrity Failures
A09 Security Logging and Alerting Failures
A10 Mishandling of Exceptional Conditions
A10 Mishandling of Exceptional Conditions
Background.
Score table.
Description.
How to prevent.
Example attack scenarios.
References.
List of Mapped CWEs
A10:2025 Mishandling of Exceptional Conditions
Mishandling of Exceptional Conditions is a new category for 2025. This category contains 24 CWEs and focuses on improper error handling, logical errors, failing open, and other related scenarios stemming from abnormal conditions and systems may encounter. This category has some CWEs that were previously associated with poor code quality. That was too general for us; in our opinion, this more specific category provides better guidance.
Notable CWEs included in this category:
CWE-209 Generation of Error Message Containing Sensitive Information, CWE-234 Failure to Handle Missing Parameter, CWE-274 Improper Handling of Insufficient Privileges, CWE-476 NULL Pointer Dereference,
and
CWE-636 Not Failing Securely ('Failing Open')
.
CWEs Mapped
Max Incidence Rate
Avg Incidence Rate
Max Coverage
Avg Coverage
Avg Weighted Exploit
Avg Weighted Impact
Total Occurrences
Total CVEs
24
20.67%
2.95%
100.00%
37.95%
7.11
3.81
769,581
3,416
Mishandling exceptional conditions in software happens when programs fail to prevent, detect, and respond to unusual and unpredictable situations, which leads to crashes, unexpected behavior, and sometimes vulnerabilities. This can involve one or more of the following 3 failings; the application doesn't prevent an unusual situation from happening, it doesn't identify the situation as it is happening, and/or it responds poorly or not at all to the situation afterwards.
Exceptional conditions can be caused by missing, poor, or incomplete input validation, or late, high level error handling instead at the functions where they occur, or unexpected environmental states such as memory, privilege, or network issues, inconsistent exception handling, or exceptions that are not handled at all, allowing the system to fall into an unknown and unpredictable state. Any time an application is unsure of its next instruction, an exceptional condition has been mishandled. Hard-to-find errors and exceptions can threaten the security of the whole application for a long time.
Many different security vulnerabilities can happen when we mishandle exceptional conditions,
such as logic bugs, overflows, race conditions, fraudulent transactions, or issues with memory, state, resource, timing, authentication, and authorization. These types of vulnerabilities can negatively affect the confidentiality, availability, and/or integrity of a system or it's data. Attackers manipulate an application's flawed error handling to strike this vulnerability.
In order to handle an exceptional condition properly we must plan for such situations (expect the worst). We must 'catch' every possible system error directly at the place where they occur and then handle it (which means do something meaningful to solve the problem and ensure we recover from the issue). As part of the handling, we should include throwing an error (to inform the user in an understandable way), logging of the event, as well as issuing an alert if we feel that is justified. We should also have a global exception handler in place in case there is ever something we have missed. Ideally, we would also have monitoring and/or observability tooling or functionality that watches for repeated errors or patterns that indicate an on-going attack, that could issue a response, defense, or blocking of some kind. This can help us block and respond to scripts and bots that focus on our error handling weaknesses.
Catching and handling exceptional conditions ensures that the underlying infrastructure of our programs are not left to deal with unpredictable situations. If you are part way through a transaction of any kind, it is extremely important that you roll back every part of the transaction and start again (also known as failing closed). Attempting to recover a transaction part way through is often where we create unrecoverable mistakes.
Whenever possible, add rate limiting, resource quotas, throttling, and other limits wherever possible, to prevent exceptional conditions in the first place. Nothing in information technology should be limitless, as this leads to a lack of application resilience, denial of service, successful brute force attacks, and extraordinary cloud bills. \
Consider whether identical repeated errors, above a certain rate, should only be outputted as statistics showing how often they have occurred and in what time frame. This information should be appended to the original message so as not to interfere with automated logging and monitoring, see
A09:2025 Security Logging & Alerting Failures
.
On top of this, we would want to include strict input validation (with sanitization or escaping for potentially hazardous characters that we must accept), and
centralized
error handling, logging, monitoring, and alerting, and a global exception handler. One application should not multiple functions for handling exceptional conditions, it should be performed in one place, the same way each time. We should also create project security requirements for all the advice in this section, perform threat modelling and/or secure design review activities in the design phase of our projects, perform code review or static analysis, as well as execute stress, performance, and penetration testing of the final system.
If possible, your entire organization should handle exceptional conditions in the same way, as it makes it easier to review and audit code for errors in this important security control.
Scenario #1:
Resource exhaustion via mishandling of exceptional conditions (Denial of Service) could be caused if the application catches exceptions when files are uploaded, but doesn't properly release resources after. Each new exception leaves resources locked or otherwise unavailable, until all resources are used up.
Scenario #2:
Sensitive data exposure via improper handling or database errors that reveals the full system error to the user. The attacker continues to force errors in order to use the sensitive system information to create a better SQL injection attack. The sensitive data in the user error messages are reconnaissance.
Scenario #3:
State corruption in financial transactions could be caused by an attacker interrupting a multi-step transaction via network disruptions. Imagine the transaction order was: debit user account, credit destination account, log transaction. If the system doesn't properly roll back the entire transaction (fail closed) when there is an error part way through, the attacker could potentially drain the user's account, or possibly a race condition that allows the attacker to send money to the destination multiple times.
OWASP MASVS‑RESILIENCE
OWASP Cheat Sheet: Logging
OWASP Cheat Sheet: Error Handling
OWASP Application Security Verification Standard (ASVS): V16.5 Error Handling
OWASP Testing Guide: 4.8.1 Testing for Error Handling
Best practices for exceptions (Microsoft, .Net)
Clean Code and the Art of Exception Handling (Toptal)
General error handling rules (Google for Developers)
Example of real-world mishandling of an exceptional condition
CWE-209 Generation of Error Message Containing Sensitive Information
CWE-215 Insertion of Sensitive Information Into Debugging Code
CWE-234 Failure to Handle Missing Parameter
CWE-235 Improper Handling of Extra Parameters
CWE-248 Uncaught Exception
CWE-252 Unchecked Return Value
CWE-274 Improper Handling of Insufficient Privileges
CWE-280 Improper Handling of Insufficient Permissions or Privileges
CWE-369 Divide By Zero
CWE-390 Detection of Error Condition Without Action
CWE-391 Unchecked Error Condition
CWE-394 Unexpected Status Code or Return Value
CWE-396 Declaration of Catch for Generic Exception
CWE-397 Declaration of Throws for Generic Exception
CWE-460 Improper Cleanup on Thrown Exception
CWE-476 NULL Pointer Dereference
CWE-478 Missing Default Case in Multiple Condition Expression
CWE-484 Omitted Break Statement in Switch
CWE-550 Server-generated Error Message Containing Sensitive Information
CWE-636 Not Failing Securely ('Failing Open')
CWE-703 Improper Check or Handling of Exceptional Conditions
CWE-754 Improper Check for Unusual or Exceptional Conditions
CWE-755 Improper Handling of Exceptional Conditions
CWE-756 Missing Custom Error Page
.
Made with
Material for MkDocs