Organizations increasingly rely on
Microsoft
 as their foundational productivity and security technology provider. As these environments grow in scale and complexity, security leaders are responsible for operationalizing the vast signals traversing their Microsoft stack in order to anticipate and preempt threats. At the same time, those efforts must deliver measurable security outcomes and clear return on investment.

If you're reading this, you already know what's at stake. But I'll say it louder for the folks in the back: As more of your environment consolidates onto Microsoft, the attack surface evolves – and without fully operationalizing that ecosystem, risk grows alongside it.

We are excited to announce the availability of Rapid7
MDR for Microsoft
 – a preemptive threat detection, investigation, and response service that brings together Rapid7's global SOC, our market-leading SIEM technology, and deeper bi-directional Microsoft Defender integrations. The service helps security and IT teams maximize their investments, reduce cost and complexity, respond decisively to threats, and improve their security posture and resilience.

Extend the power of your stack

Microsoft Defender provides broad visibility across modern environments – from endpoint and identity to cloud and email. That visibility leads many organizations to a fine line, where it can either mean
rich, actionable insight
 for some security teams, and
overwhelming signal volume and missed alerts
 for others. Rapid7 helps organizations build a clear picture from the rich telemetry by bringing these Microsoft signals together with our native telemetry. And by incorporating exposure and asset risk directly into investigations, our SOC is empowered to anticipate likely breach paths and intervene earlier in the attack lifecycle. Combining your Microsoft security stack with our preemptive MDR ultimately helps you:

Anticipate attacks before they start

Respond with certainty across the full attack lifecycle

Strengthen resilience through partnership

Get better outcomes from Microsoft - not overhead

Capabilities that drive real-world outcomes

Leaning into Rapid7's proven record as a leader in managed detection and response, MDR for Microsoft combines powerful AI-SOC technology with expert human service delivery to help Microsoft-centric organizations achieve measurable security outcomes. In
IDC's recent Business Value of Rapid7 MDR study
, customers achieved a 422% three-year ROI, identified threats 87% faster, and reduced the likelihood of a major security event by 54%. MDR for Microsoft delivers these same results through capabilities designed to operationalize and protect Microsoft environments at scale, including:

Risk-aware analysis that stops attacks earlier:
 By pairing enterprise vulnerability risk management with analysis of live threat activity, the service preemptively identifies the attack paths most likely to be exploited – empowering efficient analyst evaluation with a clear understanding of underlying asset context.

Dedicated cybersecurity advisor extends your team:
 Your advisor leverages their practitioner experience to provide regular threat briefings, environment-hardening advice, program governance, and health checks – helping drive long-term maturity without adding headcount.

Decisive response backed by deep forensics and unlimited IR:
 Remote containment, endpoint forensics powered by our open-source DFIR framework –  Velociraptor – and unlimited incident response ensure threats are stopped quickly, and fully investigated and neutralized before our team rests.

Unlimited log ingestion delivers predictable value
: Remove SIEM cost constraints and ensure complete visibility so investigations are never limited by data volume or surprise overage fees.

Bi-Directional Defender integration that reduces friction:
 Endpoint alerts and analyst actions stay synchronized between Rapid7 and Microsoft consoles, keeping systems aligned while laying the foundation for broader integrations across additional Microsoft security vectors.

Always-on, expert-led SOC coverage:
 Our 24x7x365 global SOC continuously monitors and investigates activity across Microsoft and non-Microsoft environments, ensuring threats are identified and acted on as soon as they emerge.

Full transparency into SOC activity and outcomes:
 With direct access to the SIEM and investigation workflows, your team can ride sidecar on investigations, run your own queries, upskill internal teams, and clearly see the outcomes being delivered by the Rapid7 SOC over time.

Additional value-drivers included in the service are unlimited SOAR automation, standard 13-month data retention with the ability to extend, proactive threat hunting, and AI-assisted investigation workflows, delivering a comprehensive MDR experience that scales with your environment and outpaces attackers.

Make the most of Microsoft Defender with Rapid7

As Microsoft continues to serve as the backbone of modern environments, the ability to translate security signals into consistent action becomes increasingly critical. MDR for Microsoft is designed to help security leaders move confidently from visibility to outcomes – pairing the strength of Microsoft Defender with Rapid7's proven expertise, preemptive risk-awareness, and resilience-building capabilities. The result is a security program that not only sees more, but responds faster, operates with greater confidence, and proves its value as environments continue to scale.

If you'd like to see how MDR for Microsoft can help you operationalize your Microsoft security stack, request a demo or reach out to your Rapid7 account team to continue the conversation.

Article Tags

Managed Detection and Response (MDR)

[

Rapid7

Author Posts](/blog/author/rapid7/)

Related blog posts