Technical
 / Hardware Penetration Testing

Rust's Role in Embedded Security

January 22, 2026

### Andrew Bindner

Rust's Role in Embedded Security

Rust has become a popular language for embedded and firmware development because it addresses memory corruption risks, one of the most persistent causes of security failures in low-level software. Rust, by default, enforces strict ownership rules, preventing data races by default, and eliminating entire classes of undefined behavior, which dramatically improves the safety baseline for embedded systems.

Notably, this inherent design is measurable Since Rust's first publicly stable release in 2015, fewer than 40 CVEs across all nine of their products, including Cargo, Async-h1, Regex, RSA, etc., have been attributed to the language itself. In contrast, C and C++ have accumulated decades of memory safety vulnerabilities that continue to affect products today. For organizations building smart or connected hardware, Rust represents a meaningful improvement in reliability and resilience.

However, memory safety is not the same as system security. Even with a memory safe language, an embedded device can be vulnerable to logic errors, incorrect assumptions about hardware behavior, unsafe abstractions, and flaws in trusted boundaries, which a compiler cannot prevent.  Rust reduces risk, but it does not remove the need for a more custom, targeted approach to testing.

Rust's Strengths in Embedded Security

Rust provides several security and safety advantages that are particularly valuable in embedded environments. The language enforces strict rules around memory ownership and borrowing, which prevents buffer overflows, use after free errors, and double frees. Memory management is deterministic, which is essential for real-time and safety-sensitive systems. Error handling is explicit, encouraging developers to account for failure cases. In
no_std
  environments [e.g., bare metal], the dependency surface can be smaller than in comparable C or C++ firmware. These design choices are reflected in Rust's security record and were amplified by an article on Microsoft stating:

"roughly 70% of the security issues that the MSRC assigns a CVE to are memory safety issues."

Microsoft

Why Rust for safe systems programming

Public vulnerability data concerning Rust shows very few language-level issues. When vulnerabilities do occur, they are usually related to logical flow considerations, misconfigurations, or misuse of unsafe code, not flaws in the core language design.

This inherent strength translates from the technical team to the C-suite because Rust demonstrably lowers the probability of certain failure modes. It improves code quality and reduces long-term maintenance risk. It is a strong foundation for building secure embedded products, but it is not a guarantee of security.

What the Research Shows about Embedded Rust Risk

While public exploit reports involving Rust-based embedded products are rare, academic research provides important insight into the real risk landscape.

A 2024 peer reviewed study from Purdue University, titled "
Rust for Embedded Systems: Current State and Open Problems
" analyzed more than 6,400 embedded Rust crates. The researchers found that embedded Rust projects use unsafe code blocks, noted specifically by the named keyword, significantly more often than non-embedded Rust projects. In many cases, unsafe code is required to interact with hardware registers, DMA engines, interrupts, and vendor SDKs. It's important to understand that unsafe doesn't turn off the borrow checker or disable any of Rust's other safety checks according to Rust's official documentation.

The study also found that existing static analysis and security tooling performed poorly on embedded Rust code. Build systems, cross compilation, and hardware-specific execution paths limit the effectiveness of automated analysis.

This research supports the conclusion that even though Rust reduces memory safety risks, embedded Rust systems may still contain large areas of code that the compiler cannot fully reason about. These areas are precisely where logic errors and security flaws tend to appear and are human-introduced failures.

The absence of public exploit disclosures should not be interpreted as proof of safety. Rust adoption in embedded products is still relatively new and has not yet been subjected to sustained public scrutiny. Additionally, security testing often happens privately, under non-disclosure agreements where findings are not published. In other words, lack of publicly available evidence is not proof of security.

Focus on Logic-Based Flaws to Reduce Risk in Rust

In short, and if you take away nothing else from this article, it's this: Rust enforces how code uses memory allocations, but it does not require that the code implements the correct security logic. But why? Embedded devices depend on hardware behavior that exists outside the language model. Interrupt timing, peripheral configuration, debug interfaces, bootloaders, and update mechanisms all operate beyond the reach of the compiler. Many embedded Rust projects also rely on foreign function interfaces to C or vendor libraries, introducing additional trust boundaries.

As a result, penetration testers could find vulnerabilities in Rust-based firmware that have nothing to do with memory corruption. The most common issues are logic-based. They arise from incorrect state handling, flawed assumptions, cryptographic misuse, and unsafe interactions with hardware. These types of logic-based flaws are what the remainder of this article intends to showcase.

Examples of Logic-Based Vulnerabilities Found in Embedded Rust Systems

The following examples illustrate common patterns.

These examples are simplified for clarity, but they represent real categories of issues identified during professional security reviews. While the following are written in Rust, they are common across other programming languages.

Authentication Bypass Through Incorrect State Logic

Race Conditions Between Interrupts and Main Logic

Cryptographic Misuse Through Nonce Reuse

Incorrect Assumptions About Debug Port Locking

Trusting Length Fields from Untrusted Inputs

1. Authentication Bypass Through Incorrect State Logic

Embedded products frequently rely on internal state machines to control access to sensitive functionality. Examples include enabling debug features, accepting firmware updates, unlocking configuration menus, or transitioning into maintenance modes. Rust encourages modeling these workflows using enum, a custom data type used to define a set of named variables, which improves code clarity and reduces certain classes of bugs. However, Rust does not guarantee that the state machine enforces correct security logic.

enum DeviceState {
 Locked,
 AwaitingAuth,
 Unlocked,
}

impl DeviceState {
 fn transition(self, cmd: u8) -> DeviceState {
 match (self, cmd) {
 (DeviceState::Locked, 0x01) => DeviceState::Unlocked,
 (DeviceState::AwaitingAuth, 0x02) => DeviceState::Unlocked,
 _ => self,
 }
 }
}

What went wrong:

The device transitions directly from Locked to Unlocked when it receives a specific command. The code does not verify that authentication occurred. This code looks structured and intentional. The device maintains a clear state, and transitions occur only in response to defined commands.

The flaw lies in the logic, not the syntax. A command that should only be accepted after authentication is also accepted while the device is still locked. The compiler has no way to infer that 0x01 represents a privileged command or that authentication must precede it.

How This Is Exploited in Practice

During penetration testing, this class of flaw is typically found by:

Enumerating all accepted command values.

Sending them in unexpected orders.

Observing state transitions via side effects, logs, timing changes, or hardware behavior.

This is not theoretical. State sequencing errors are one of the most common logic flaws in embedded devices, regardless of language.

Why this matters:

From a security perspective, this is an authentication bypass. An attacker capable of injecting commands into the device over UART, SPI, BLE, CAN, or proprietary RF could possibly trigger the transition into an unlocked state without proving identity.

From a product risk perspective, this can expose protected configuration options, enable firmware updates, or unlock diagnostic interfaces intended only for authorized technicians.

Sources:

Zhou et al., "Reviewing IoT Security via Logic Bugs in IoT Platforms and Systems," IEEE Internet of Things Journal (2021)

Neshenko et al., "An Exhaustive Survey on IoT Vulnerabilities…" (2019)

Key Takeaway ( 1 )

Rust prevented memory errors in this example, but it did not prevent a broken security model. Logic errors like this can directly undermine product security.

2. Race Conditions Between Interrupts and Main Logic

Embedded systems rely heavily on interrupts. Incorrect coordination between interrupt handlers and main code can be exploited. Embedded systems rely heavily on interrupts to process asynchronous events such as UART input, sensor readings, or radio traffic. Rust allows this, but interaction between interrupt handlers and main application logic still requires inspection. The compiler cannot reason about timing, preemption, or attacker-controlled input rates.

static mut AUTH_FLAG: bool = false;

#[interrupt]
fn UART_RX() {
 unsafe {
 if read_byte() == 0xA5 {
 AUTH_FLAG = true;
 }
 }
}

fn privileged_operation() {
 if unsafe { AUTH_FLAG } {
 perform_sensitive_action();
 }
}

What went wrong:

Here, an interrupt handler sets a flag when a specific byte is received, and the main application checks that flag before executing a privileged action. The logic assumes that setting the flag implies successful authentication. It does not account for timing, partial input, repeated triggering, or concurrent execution. A shared flag is modified inside an interrupt without proper synchronization. The main code trusts the flag without validating context or timing.

How This Is Exploited in Practice

Replaying input sequences rapidly.

Observing inconsistent behavior that reveals race conditions.

Triggering interrupts during sensitive execution windows.

The vulnerability exists even if the firmware is written entirely in safe Rust. The problem is not memory safety; it is concurrency design.

Why this matters:

An attacker does not need to defeat cryptography or memory safety. They only need to manipulate timing. By injecting carefully timed input, the attacker can force privileged actions without satisfying the intended security checks.

This class of issue is especially dangerous in devices that:

Perform actions immediately after interrupts.

Trust single-bit state flags for security decisions.

Combine ISRs and application logic without synchronization.

Key Takeaway ( 2 )

Concurrency errors can create security vulnerabilities even when memory safety is preserved.

3. Cryptographic Misuse Through Nonce Reuse

Rust cryptography libraries are memory safe and well-reviewed. However, they cannot prevent incorrect usage. Cryptographic security depends on correct protocol design.

let nonce = [0u8; 12];
encrypt_packet(&key, &nonce, data);

What went wrong:

AES-GCM requires that nonces never repeat for a given key. This code uses a static nonce, often because it seems simpler or because persistent storage was overlooked. Rust allows this because nonce uniqueness is a protocol requirement, not a type-level property.

How This Is Exploited in Practice

During testing, attackers capture encrypted traffic across reboots or sessions. When the same nonce is reused with the same key, AES generates the same keystream for any message that reuses that nonce. Since ciphertext blocks are created by XORing the plaintext with this keystream, an attacker can XOR two ciphertexts together to cancel out the keystream, revealing the XOR of the two plaintexts. This is a real-world failure mode seen across embedded products in many languages, including Rust.

Why this matters:

Nonce reuse in AES-GCM is catastrophic. It allows attackers to:

Recover encryption keystreams.

Forge valid encrypted messages.

Modify or inject firmware update payloads.

This can completely undermine device trust, even though the cryptographic library itself is correct and memory safe.

Key Takeaway ( 3 )

Using a safe language does not guarantee safe cryptography. Design mistakes remain exploitable.

4. Incorrect Assumptions About Debug Port Locking

Developers often assume hardware is locked after writing a control register. Many devices attempt to disable debug interfaces such as JTAG or SWD after manufacturing. Developers often write firmware to lock these interfaces during boot.

fn lock_debug_port() {
 write_reg(DEBUG_LOCK, 0x1);
}

What went wrong:

The code does not verify that the hardware entered a locked state. The code assumes that writing a value to a register successfully disables the debug port. It does not verify status bits, timing requirements, or hardware issues. Rust cannot verify hardware state. It assumes the developer understands the register semantics.

How This Is Exploited in Practice

Penetration testers attach a debugger and attempt access despite supposed locking. Many devices fail because the lock sequence was incomplete, unset, or incorrectly validated. Furthermore, this failure mode is common and independent of programming language.

Why this matters:

Debug interfaces like JTAG or SWD may remain accessible, allowing full firmware extraction. If the debug interface remains active, an attacker with physical access can:

Extract firmware.

Modify memory at runtime.

Bypass authentication and secure boot mechanisms.

From a business standpoint, this can expose intellectual property, cryptographic keys, and proprietary algorithms.

Key Takeaway ( 4 )

Security depends on verifying hardware behavior, not assuming it.

5. Trusting Length Fields from Untrusted Inputs

Rust prevents buffer overflows but cannot prevent flawed trust decisions. Embedded devices parse structured data from external sources such as serial buses, radios, or network protocols. Therefore, Rust ensures memory bounds safety, but it does not enforce trust boundaries.

let len = frame[1];
let payload = &frame[2..2 + len as usize];

What went wrong:

The code trusts a length value supplied by an external source. While Rust prevents out-of-bounds memory access, the logic still assumes the length is valid and meaningful.

How This Is Exploited in Practice

Penetration testers can send malformed frames with inconsistent lengths and observe how the device responds. Logic errors often appear before any memory safety issue arises. This class of flaw is extremely common in firmware assessments.

Why this matters:

Malformed inputs can manipulate program flow, bypass checks, or disrupt protocol state. Attackers may be able to craft frames that:

Trigger partial parsing.

Desynchronize protocol state.

Bypass validation steps.

Manipulate application logic.

This can lead to unauthorized commands, denial of service, or inconsistent device behavior.

Key Takeaway ( 5 )

Input validation errors remain a leading cause of embedded vulnerabilities, regardless of language.

Why Penetration Testing Remains Essential

Rust significantly improves safety, but embedded systems remain exposed to:

Logic flaws and incorrect trust assumptions

Unsafe hardware abstractions

Debug and firmware extraction pathways

Cryptographic misuse

Update and provisioning weaknesses

Timing and fault injection attacks

Professional
hardware penetration testing
 evaluates the full system, not just the source code. It examines firmware, hardware interfaces, communication channels, and operational assumptions under adversarial conditions.

For senior leadership, the conclusion is clear. Rust lowers risk, but it does not eliminate it. Products written in Rust still require rigorous security assessment before deployment.

Conclusion

Rust is one of the most important advances in systems programming in decades. It provides a strong foundation for safer embedded development and reduces the likelihood of catastrophic memory failures. Organizations adopting Rust are making smart technical decisions.

But secure products are built through design validation, threat modeling, and adversarial testing, not language choice alone. Attackers exploit logic, hardware behavior, and operational gaps, regardless of the language used to write the firmware. Therefore, Rust should be treated as a powerful tool, not a security guarantee.

Authors:

[

Andrew Bindner

Senior Security Consultant](/authors/andrew-bindner)

Explore More Blog Posts

[

Adversary Simulation

Pipe Dreams: Remote Code Execution via Quest Desktop Authority Named Pipe

February 1, 2026

Discover the risks of the CVE-2025-67813 vulnerability in Quest Desktop Authority. Learn how this RCE flaw impacts your organization and how to mitigate it.

Learn More](https://www.netspi.com/blog/technical-blog/adversary-simulation/pipe-dreams-remote-code-execution-via-quest-desktop-authority-named-pipe/)[

Vulnerability Management

Ivanti Endpoint Manager Mobile (EPMM) [CVE-2026-1281 & CVE-2026-1340]: Overview & Takeaways

January 30, 2026

Ivanti has disclosed two critical zero‑day vulnerabilities affecting Ivanti Endpoint Manager Mobile (EPMM), tracked as CVE‑2026‑1281 and CVE‑2026‑1340.
Both vulnerabilities have been exploited in active attacks and allow unauthenticated remote threat actors to compromise EPMM appliances.

Learn More](https://www.netspi.com/blog/executive-blog/vulnerability-management/ivanti-endpoint-manager-mobile-epmm-cve-2026-1281-cve-2026-1340-overview-takeaways/)[

Attack Surface Management

Why Your Security Program Needs Domain Monitoring

January 26, 2026

NetSPI Domain Monitoring continuously discovers and assesses look-alike domains related to your organization, providing deep contextual intelligence including risk profiles, WHOIS records, IP details, DNS records, and certificate data. The NetSPI Platform streamlines response, enabling rapid action against high-risk domains.

Learn More](https://www.netspi.com/blog/executive-blog/attack-surface-management/why-your-security-program-needs-domain-monitoring/)