Use Case Scenario Template
Describing Intellectual Property Rights declarations needed to engage
in Preservation Strategies at a Digital Repository
(See attached examples)

1. What is the Use Case about (i.e., "Title")? (please include organization
name, use case number if more than 1, and contact name)

2. Who are the stakeholders in this scenario? (Stakeholders are those
persons or parties who have a key role to play in ensuring that the preservation
strategies as agreed to between preservation repository and content depositor, narrowly
defined. For instance, in a contractual agreement between a depositor and repository,
stakeholders would be representatives of those two parties, rather than either the
original author / copyright holder or the ultimate user of content since the interest of
both of those parties would be represented by either the depositor or the repository.)

3. What are the assumptions made in relation to the preservation
strategies and services offered in the scenario described? These
may include specifics about the particular environment of the
repository. (For example, if preservation strategies / services are offered at various
levels from bit preservation to minimal, enhanced, or optimal level, assumptions about
the level assigned should be described. See examples of levels of service with attached
Use Case example.)

4. Describe: a) the type and complexity of digital objects, b)
preservation strategies and c) services involved

5. Describe the range of events needing to take place to achieve the
preservation strategies and services for this scenario (Sample list of
preservation related event categories: Recording IP Ownership, Ingestion,
Transformation (migration, compression, normalization), Media / Storage Relocation,
Quality Assurance (virus check, integrity check), Fixity Check, Dissemination, Withdrawal)

6. List the permissions necessary to enable the events described
above (Sample list of preservation related permission categories: Discover, Duplicate
(to another storage medium), Modify (by transformations), Backup/Restore,
Install/Uninstall, Verify authenticity, Delete, Withdraw, Distribute)

7. List any constraints imposed upon the permissions necessary to
perform the preservation related events (Sample list of constraints:
Quality, Format, Watermark, Time, Attribution. Note: there may not be a need to
declare or describe any constraints upon the Permissions. If not, please indicate "None")
Preservation Rights Declaration Use Case Template Page 1 of 1
Drafted by NjH, Stanford University Libraries 6/7/2004
nhoebel@stanford.edu